# A Wavelet-Based Keystoneness Species Analysis of Microbiome Correlations and Causalities of Complex Diseases
## Abstract
Dysbiosis, the imbalance of microbes, is associated with complex diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D), colorectal cancer (CRC), and hypertension (HTN). Yet, the causality remains elusive. Here, we leverage the keystone species network principle to dissect microbiome causations of complex diseases via an integrated approach with microbiome and genome-wide association study (GWAS) data. Using relative abundance data, we apply a keystoneness identification framework to compute the keystoneness of each species in control and disease samples. With these keystonenesses, we visualize the keystoneness distributions, visualize the relative abundances using wavelet-based multi-view 3D clustering (WMC3D), perform machine learning disease prediction, and compute correlations among species abundances. In parallel, we utilize GWAS data to investigate the causality between microbes and these complex diseases using Mendelian randomization (MR). We found that our species keystoneness resemble a power law distribution, and that the relative abundance samples can be distinguished both with WMC3D and using machine learning. Moreover, via MR, we construct a putative microbiome disease causality multi-layer network among 36 bacterial taxa and T2D, CRC, and HTN. Specifically, species Eubacterium sp. CAG-180 has a positive effect on T2D, while species Agathobacter sp000434275 has a negative effect on T2D. Additionally, family Brevibacillaceae, phylum Firmicutes, class Bacilli, class Clostridia, order Lachnospirales, and family Lachnospiracaea have positive effects on HTN and the abundance of species Clostridium CAG-81 sp000435795, which has a positive effect on T2D. Moreover, family Brevibacillaceae, phylum Firmicutes, class Clostridia, and class Bacilli have negative effects on CRC. Thus, our prioritized causal microbes at the species level might be worthy of further experimental validation.
## Significance Statement
The gut microbiome is an essential component of human health, and an imbalance of microbes has been linked with disease, including inflammatory bowel disease, type 2 diabetes, colorectal cancer, and hypertension. We investigate the role of the microbiome in these complex diseases by identifying keystone species and utilizing wavelet-based multi-view 3D clustering. Our results support a causal role of several species in these diseases, shedding light on the fundamental mechanisms of these diseases. Understanding the role of the microbiome may provide insight into comorbidity and potential treatments for these complex diseases.
